[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: In
my last conversation
with Simon Chokoisky,
we spoke about his book
on the five Dharma types.
The interview received
such positive feedback
that we decided to have Simon
back and look at his newest
work, "Sex, Love, and Dharma."
It helps us see ourselves
in terms of relationships
through our Dharma type and I
found it really interesting.
And everybody just loved
the last talk we had,
because-- we were just talking
off-camera a moment ago,
and you said, well, what
did you like about the book,
and I said, because it's
an incredibly useful guide
to seeing ourselves in
some kind of context,
which we don't get from birth.
There's no manual
on these things.
Well, there is now, I suppose.
>>SIMON CHOKOISKY: Yeah,
it's a survival manual--
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>CHOKOISKY: --for everything
from health to love
to your relationship
with the divine,
and I think part of
the reason, maybe,
for the positive feedback is
that as I mentioned to you,
you and I, it's like
talking to an old friend,
so you certainly make people
more comfortable and--
>>REGINA: Well, thank you.
>>CHOKOISKY: --and at ease.
I'm glad to be here.
>>REGINA: OK, so
everyone saw this.
Now, by the time
they see this, it
will have been a little
while, so what I'd like to do
is just take the first few
minutes to set up the Dharma
types again, and
then we're going
to start the overlays in this
very complex subject of love.
>>CHOKOISKY: OK.
>>REGINA: OK?
>>CHOKOISKY: The Dharma type
is simply a practical tool
to help you understand,
what is your gift, what
is my gift in the
world, and what
keeps me from expressing it?
So I've had people call me
recently on the phone and say,
Simon, you told
me I'm a Merchant,
and I feel so amazing, it
just let all the stress out,
and it's OK to be
who I am, because--
and I explain what
a Merchant is.
Their purpose is to share
laughter, to connect people,
to produce value in the
world by giving people
opportunities, and so on.
And so this person
changed their profession,
they changed the way
they see their lives,
and they're happy
being who they are.
And that's the purpose--
>>REGINA: That's huge.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's it.
And so the Dharma type says it's
OK to be who you are, or just
understand who you are, and out
of that, what your purpose is
on this planet.
>>REGINA: And also what
the innate challenges
might be to that type.
>>CHOKOISKY: And every
type has challenges.
>>REGINA: Yes, they do.
But if you know what
they are, you think,
oh my gosh, well, really?
I'm kind of sitting
right where I need to be.
>>CHOKOISKY: Right.
>>REGINA: That's
expected, and now it's
just transcending that.
One thing you say is you
talk about in the West,
we have more of a framework
of "I matter" versus "my role
matters," and because when we're
talking about relationship,
we end up in definitely
role-oriented territory.
Explain the difference
between those two.
>>CHOKOISKY: So the "I
matter" is valuable.
It says, I can step out
today and do anything I want.
I can become a
real estate agent.
I can climb Mount Everest.
I can train to be a firefighter.
I have choice and I can
exercise that in the world.
Understanding your Dharma in the
East, especially, it was said,
yes, you have choice and some
choices are better than others.
So understand how you are
built. The way I was built
may not make me an athlete.
It just won't work, and
I'll have pain and injuries,
and I won't lead a full
life if I go that route.
So understanding
your design helps
you to channel your free will.
So this is why East and
West are coming together,
because East was all about
this is your framework,
and this is what you're
built for, West is--
>>REGINA: This is what I want.
>>CHOKOISKY: This
is what I want.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CHOKOISKY: And
now East and West
are coming together and
saying, do what you want,
and do it in a way
that will produce
long-term happiness for you.
Long-term health, long-term
relationship success,
because it's based on who
you are, on your identity.
>>REGINA: OK, so now
we-- well, first of all,
why did you decide to
write this second book?
>>CHOKOISKY: Because it grabbed
ahold of me and it wouldn't let
go, and these things
write themselves.
And I was telling you
earlier, sometimes
I don't know what's
in this book.
I'll open it, and
read it, and say, oh,
wow, that's interesting,
and somehow I
wrote that, and it-- a lot of
research, a lot of inspiration,
a lot of perspiration, but
it's my purpose as an Educator,
and that's my Dharma type.
And I hate talking about
myself, but maybe this
is an introduction
to these types.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
It's important.
>>CHOKOISKY: I'm a
blah, blah, blah kind
of windbag kind of person,
where I could be driving a taxi
or just walking down the street,
but I'll be telling people, oh,
did you know that those shoes
are made in blah, blah, blah?
Oh, did you know
that this building--
>>REGINA: Can't help yourself.
>>CHOKOISKY: I can't help it.
So my Dharma, my purpose
is to share wisdom and let
other people do with it what
they will, so I write books.
>>REGINA: And relationship
specifically was calling you.
>>CHOKOISKY: Relationship
specifically,
because once you know who you
are, we are relational beings.
The way we express who
we are is in the context
of one-on-one
relationships and society,
and our social relationship
is our profession.
What is my identity
within my tribe?
And then one-on-one.
But what permeates those
is, the fundamental
is understanding
who I am, and that's
why the book-- really,
the title of the book
should be "Dharma,
Love, and Sex,"
because Dharma comes first.
Dharma just means--
it's a fancy word,
but it just means your
purpose, your design,
your divine design.
And honoring your divine design
will attract the right people
in your life, the
right profession,
and the right spiritual
experiences for you.
So it has-- so the
Dharma type is implicit
both in our everyday life--
what we eat for breakfast--
in our social life--
what we do for a living--
and in our spiritual life,
how we relate to the divine.
>>REGINA: OK, so
looking around us,
we're talking about
the world at large.
Certainly in the United States,
the divorce rate is 50%.
So every time
someone gets married
and they have their beautiful
flowers and dresses,
it's 50-50 that's not going
to last for however long.
Now, when you look at the world
through your lens, how often do
you see, when marriages
end in divorce,
that they're really not
suited for one another
on a Dharma type level?
>>CHOKOISKY: I reference
ancient cultures a lot,
and it's not because I'm in
love with everything ancient,
but there are some wisdom
teachings that I think
are valuable for us today.
In some ancient
cultures, they used
to match couples based not
only on their sexuality, which
is one important aspect, on
their emotional understanding,
but also on how that couple
would impact society.
If these two people
get together,
will their children
be prosperous?
Will they be prosperous?
Or will just the
dynamic that they
create bring them down
in the eyes of society?
So if you look at a fictional
example, Romeo and Juliet.
They were perfectly compatible.
These two were inseparable,
and yet, socially, they
had terrible compatibility,
so that tragedy--
>>REGINA: Took down
their clans, yeah.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah,
and of course,
the way you do this is by
looking at the horoscope,
and I know this may sound
a little far out for some
people--
>>REGINA: No, not
for our audience.
>>CHOKOISKY: --but
the horoscope is
a map of your life--
of your karmic DNA,
if you want to say
it that way, and when
you match two
horoscopes, you can
see how two people match up,
not only for love and health,
but also for prosperity and each
other's spiritual evolution.
>>REGINA: OK, and
so societies that
do that tend to create matches
that have more staying power?
>>CHOKOISKY: As a general
rule, yes, but then again,
free will is still there.
>>REGINA: Yes, of course.
We're human.
>>CHOKOISKY: And
there is something
to be said for that lightning,
the [SPEAKING FRENCH]
as they say in French.
That lightning hits
you, and you're in love,
and let's just go for it.
Forget the--
>>REGINA: Well, and you do.
The lightning, that to me
is speaking to the soul.
It's an expression of the soul
that pay attention, be alert,
be in this moment, now
there's a reason for it,
or the lightning
wouldn't be happening.
There's something there,
but what about what
happens more often?
Oh, gosh, I'm 34,
I'm not married yet,
I want, I need, and people go,
and then they look for someone,
and find someone, and,
you know, seal it.
>>CHOKOISKY: What about it?
You mean settling?
The idea of settling or--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
the notion that we
get into an area
more of need and what
is perceived that
we should be doing
by a certain time of life, which
oftentimes is why people do
get married.
It's like, ah, gee,
the clock's ticking.
>>CHOKOISKY: There
are pros and cons.
Another feature of
the ancient traditions
is they teach us how to
honor the cycles of time,
both the daily cycle-- there's
a best time to ask for a raise,
there's a worst time to ask
for a raise during the day,
or to make love, and so on.
And within the general
cycle of your life,
there are times when marriage
relationships are most likely,
and I can see that
on a horoscope.
So when a client comes to me
and says, Simon, I'm single.
I don't know what's
wrong with me.
And I'll say, there's
nothing wrong with you,
that karma simply
hasn't fruitioned.
There are some trees
that take years
to produce fruit and some trees
flower and fruit right away.
You are the tree that's going to
fruit in two and a half years,
and then a relationship
is coming, and this is--
>>REGINA: And is
this usually correct?
Do you find in your casting
of charts for people
that it generally plays out?
>>CHOKOISKY: Usually, yeah.
Now, a skeptic might say,
well, you planted that idea
in their mind.
>>REGINA: Absolutely, and
there is always that effect.
>>CHOKOISKY: And
I tell my clients,
never let anyone
lay a trip on you.
Not even me.
Not even God, or your
idea of God, that this
is what I should do based
on my religion, my family,
or my social expectations.
Nonetheless, it's my
role as a counselor
to sort of walk that tightrope,
and give the information as I
interpret it, and let them
take away what they take away.
And more often than
not, it's correct.
Sometimes I will look at a
chart and go blank, and not
see anything, and I say, here's
your money back, thank you,
and I--
>>REGINA: Why would
you see nothing?
What--
>>CHOKOISKY: It's not my
lot to be part of their--
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
I see.
>>CHOKOISKY: --of their flow--
>>REGINA: Yeah, I see
what you're saying.
>>CHOKOISKY: --and
for whatever reason.
>>REGINA: Right.
It's not showing itself
to you for a reason.
>>CHOKOISKY: I
just can't see it.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I understand.
>>CHOKOISKY: So I
simply can't interact
and I just say, well, we can
try again in a year maybe.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
because the information
isn't for their conscious
knowledge at that time.
>>CHOKOISKY: Or for mine.
>>REGINA: Or for yours, yeah.
And as the saying
goes, there's a time
for every purpose under heaven.
>>CHOKOISKY: Oh, very much so.
And in this book, I do
talk about cycles a lot,
your 24-hour cycle, the cycle--
the general seasonal cycles,
and of course, we're
becoming more conscious,
eat what's in season, right?
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's an
awareness of nature's cycles.
Why am I eating mango in the
middle of winter in Colorado?
>>REGINA: I know, when I'm
served a salad or something
that has these little tomatoes,
these little plastic tomatoes
on them, I just push them away.
It's consciously, it's
not even an option
to eat those in the winter.
>>CHOKOISKY: And it's not
so much that it's an idea,
but we have bugs in our
bodies that know it's winter,
and they're made to digest
the food that's in the winter,
and there are studies now
that show that if you feed
off-season food to
a deer, it'll die,
because its microflora is
not ready for that food.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CHOKOISKY: It eats roots
when it's time to eat roots.
It eats grass when
it's spring and summer.
And its body knows what to do.
Well, we're part
of nature as well.
>>REGINA: So if we
decide, no, I'm doing
salads and juice all winter.
>>CHOKOISKY: You know, human
beings are the most resilient
and the most
adaptable, so that's
why we can be vegetarian,
or Atkins diet, or vegan.
We have the adaptability.
The question is,
what's best for you?
>>REGINA: Right, and not forcing
ourself into one or the other,
because I've done that.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah, and I
think we've all done that,
and that's where this book comes
from is, what's right for me?
What's my Dharma?
What's my Dharma type?
And also from Ayurveda,
what's my Dosha?
Which is something we touched on
in the last interview as well.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And that does play-- it does
factor well into the Dharma
type, so, OK.
Now, let's just do
a quick little recap
so we get the basic
Dharma types before we
start overlaying relationship.
Let's start with Warrior.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes.
The Warrior's gift is
the ability to lead.
The Warrior knows what to
do in a given situation
or they quickly find out.
Warriors do well in emergencies.
So when there's an explosion
outside, everyone freaks out,
the Warrior becomes calm.
They look around and say,
OK, what do I need to do?
Because their Dharma
comes to the forefront.
And when you're living your
Dharma, you feel in the zone,
you get in that zone.
>>REGINA: So military leaders,
I mean, that would be,
like, the most classic extreme.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's a
classic, but single moms
raising their kids.
>>REGINA: That's right, yeah.
>>CHOKOISKY: Because they
are-- that's their purpose.
A Warrior is a leader.
Their role, their Dharma, their
purpose is to solve problems.
The best Warriors do it
quietly, so that no one
knows they were there.
The worst Warriors do
it with lots of [ROARS].
That's the lowest
form of the Warrior.
So that's the Warrior's Dharma.
And Warriors take on
qualities from Educators, so--
>>REGINA: And that's
where we're going next.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's
what we're going
is, finding their just cause is
very important for a Warrior,
because they have natural
leadership ability,
but knowing which cause to
anchor it to, how to use it,
is key.
>>REGINA: OK, so let's go to--
should we go to the Educator
then?
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>CHOKOISKY: The
Educator, as I mentioned
previously, their purpose,
their Dharma, their gift,
is to bring information, wisdom,
and truth into the world.
To council.
Now, you don't have
to be a teacher,
or a counselor, a scientist.
Whatever profession you do,
you're doing that naturally
just by virtue of who you are.
If you're an Educator,
people will always
kind of come up to you and say,
hey, you seem pretty decent.
[SIGH] You know, I broke up
with my girlfriend yesterday,
and I really--
>>REGINA: People want
to talk to you a lot.
>>CHOKOISKY: And they'll
just start talking to you,
and I'm like, do I know you?
This just happened in the
airport yesterday with me,
and I had a long
one-hour conversation
with no introduction
with the person.
That's an Educator.
That's your Dharma.
Then there is the Merchant type,
and the Merchant's unique gift
is the ability to connect
people, to find value
where it wasn't before.
They'll take a coconut
they found on the ground
in Thailand, bring it to the
US, pluck a couple of hairs,
and go, this is
the Elvis coconut,
and sell it for $150 on eBay.
They have the ability
to visualize value,
to bring out value, and
make people want it.
It's a gift to connect people.
Regina, have you met Ellie?
Let me connect you guys.
Boom.
And a whole-- a
company is founded
on that type of connection.
Merchants are the
masters of that.
Then we have the Laborer.
The Laborer is the
foundation of society.
Their unique gift is to build.
Build, build, build.
Build families, build
homes, build communities.
Laborers have the gift of
nourishing others in a way
that no one else can do, not
none of the other Dharma types.
So they're the nourishers and
the builders of the Dharma type
family.
And finally we have Outsiders.
And Outsiders, as we were
talking about earlier,
they're the thumb.
They go in their own direction.
Their Dharma is to go
in a different direction
than the other
four types, right?
And often, Outsiders--
not often, but sometimes
you'll see Outsiders
wear a thumb ring,
and if you see that,
whether it's the coffee
barista or the CEO,
you know what's
up, that they are strong
individuals, asserting
that they are somehow
different from the ebb
and flow of the normal
sort of social structure.
I'm unique.
I'm independent.
>>REGINA: What do they offer?
>>CHOKOISKY: Their
gift is innovation.
Without Outsiders, things
get stale and boring.
It's the same old "Leave It
to Beaver" kind of existence.
Outsider comes in and
they're rock and roll.
They bring something
fresh, new, and innovative.
It may not always
be received well,
at least initially, by
society, so Outsiders also
have a deep sense of anxiety.
Their nervous system tends
to be a little bit more
sensitive than others, which is
why I have specific meditations
and breathing exercises so
they can ease into that.
And just understanding that
they are wired differently
can help an Outsider go,
OK, well, this is who I am.
It's OK to be a little
more anxious, a little more
different than-- or
sensitive than other people.
>>REGINA: That was interesting
to read in your book,
because I've-- I took the
test again, in the first book,
and then, of course, the second
one, to see if I'd changed.
No, I hadn't changed.
I'm mostly Outsider,
secondary effect, Educator,
which is, for what I
do, as an example--
>>CHOKOISKY: It's perfect.
>>REGINA: --perfect.
I'm always looking at
new ways in the media
to introduce new themes, new
subjects, go into new territory
all the time, but yet in
a very-- a lifelong path
at the same time.
There's been a stability
to it, but you're
right about that
nervous system thing.
There's always a low
kind of level anxiety
when you're doing things that
are against the mainstream.
>>CHOKOISKY: Joseph Campbell
was an Outsider playing
an Educator, and when he
was asked, give us one word
to describe you, he didn't
say teacher or professor,
he said maverick.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>CHOKOISKY: I'm a rebel.
>>REGINA: Yeah, a rebel.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's
who he is at his heart,
even though he was a
professor all his life.
Woody Allen, same thing,
Outsider playing an Educator.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It made sense though, but
the nervous system part I
found interesting.
>>CHOKOISKY: Every type
has a physical correlation.
>>REGINA: Well, let's talk
about, now, the typology
and how they show up in
society, because there
are many different systems
of looking at people.
One of them is
Human Design, which
I find kind of interesting.
Are you familiar
with that at all?
>>CHOKOISKY: Only cursory.
Not on a deep level.
>>REGINA: Well, it could
have some very similar kind
of correlations
with Dharma types
in that you have, for example,
the Laborer would be called
the Generator in
that system, and that
is the majority of society.
There's a higher
percentage, in Human Design,
of Generators who have the
energy and power to go in
and get things done,
keep things moving.
They have the energy behind it.
Is it the same in
the Dharma types
or is it evenly split--
more evenly split?
>>CHOKOISKY: In the Dharma
types, in the current age,
there are more Outsiders
than any other type,
because societies
have blended so much.
Bloodlines have mixed.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CHOKOISKY: And I can
be in Burma tomorrow,
in the jungles, if I
got on a plane tonight.
There's a sense of
being in connection
with outside cultures
that didn't exist
2,000 years ago,
or 5,000 years ago,
or even a couple
hundred years ago.
>>REGINA: So it requires
innovation and adaptation.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes.
So in my mind, there
are more Outsiders now,
and certainly in
my practice there
are more Outsiders
than any other type.
The thing is, Outsiders
often show up as Laborers,
because when you think
about, let's say, people
coming to this country, or
let's use an older example.
The Roman Empire
conquers a piece of land.
The people from that land
speak a different language
from the Romans, from
Latin and Italian.
So they come in and they join
the workforce as Laborers,
basically, even though they
are Outsiders, because--
>>REGINA: They were explorers
but now they're working--
>>CHOKOISKY: They might
have been doctors,
they might have been something
else in their society,
but they've become subsumed.
And we live in
that kind of world
now, where English is the lingua
franca of the Western world,
sort of has economic
superiority.
So we make Outsiders.
There are a lot of Outsiders.
>>REGINA: We crank them out.
OK.
>>CHOKOISKY: We crank them out.
>>REGINA: So more Outsiders.
And what would be maybe
the less populated?
>>CHOKOISKY: That's
a good question.
I would say, most likely,
probably Educators
would be the least.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah,
because it doesn't
require a lot of Educators.
Gandhi was an Educator.
It only took one of him to
spread an idea, you know?
Because their realm
is ideas, and an idea
can spread quickly with the
written word or the spoken
word.
>>REGINA: So the population
doesn't require as many
of them.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah.
We're a dying breed.
I'm a dinosaur.
>>REGINA: You're a dinosaur.
It's funny because when I had
various people take the test,
there were a fair number
of Educators among them.
So maybe that's because
we like to share ideas
and we're attracted to each
other because of that element.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah, and
that's interesting.
That's your society.
That's your tribe.
>>REGINA: Yeah, mostly Outsiders
and Educators it seems.
Oddly.
Go ahead.
>>CHOKOISKY: Well, which may
not be globally representative,
but it's--
>>REGINA: No, no,
it's just-- this
is Sedona, Arizona, A, so just
has a different population.
Probably everyone
there is an Outsider.
>>CHOKOISKY: Enough said.
>>REGINA: Yeah, enough said.
So OK, now, what if
you score more evenly?
One person scored virtually
evenly on four of the types.
>>CHOKOISKY: Outsider.
When you can see yourself
in all of the types,
it's very likely that
you're an Outsider.
That's a corollary to the test
that if it's very difficult
to isolate one or two, then
likely you're the Outsider who
can-- because the Outsider's
Dharma-- your Dharma,
Regina-- is to understand
each of the types.
So the Outsider has, in a
sense, the toughest road,
because they have to learn how
to be Educators, Warriors, when
society needs it from them.
Outsiders have the
ability to wear many hats.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>CHOKOISKY: I'll take
on the Laborer coat,
take it off, put on the
Merchant coat when I need to.
>>REGINA: This is good to know
since are so many of us, this--
>>CHOKOISKY: Adaptable.
>>REGINA: --valuable
information.
We are adaptable and we
need to remain adaptable.
>>CHOKOISKY: But when Outsiders
come to me for readings,
my job is then to say, listen,
you can be anybody you want,
you're very adaptable, but this
is your basic core expression.
And I might say,
listen, just focus
on being a Warrior for
the next five years.
That's it.
And that helps to put
you on your track.
>>REGINA: And you can
see that in their chart.
>>CHOKOISKY: We can, yeah.
>>REGINA: That's wonderful.
OK, now, we're
going to start going
into the relational aspects
of the conversation,
and one thing you
write about in the book
is that if you are taking
kind of a baseline of society,
women tend to fall into
the role of Laborer.
>>CHOKOISKY: It is an
evolutionary sort of look.
In my book, I talk about women
as Laborers, men as Warriors,
because even the most
mild-mannered man
within an intimate
relationship assumes
the role of the Warrior.
In a sense he becomes
the penetrator.
And that's-- so every man has
to learn how to be a Warrior.
That's what a lot
of the initiations
in the teenage years center on.
And our society-- the Western
society, which is so free,
we've lost a lot of
these initiations
so boys have to try
to do it themselves
through sports, fraternities,
drinking too much,
climbing buildings,
testing themselves to prove
that, hey, I'm not a
boy anymore, I'm a man.
>>REGINA: And then let's talk
about the overlay of that
usually has inconvenient
energy patterns for people who
are educating them, maybe even
their parents and such, so
they drug them.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes, which is one
of the worst things you can do.
What ancient societies
did is they recognized
that this time was coming,
and the elders in the tribe
would take that boy away
from the social structure
and lead them through
one of these initiations.
It can be a walkabout through
nature or some kind of test
that the elders controlled.
So they knew it was safe,
because they controlled
the environment to some degree.
It wasn't completely wild,
but there's still the chance
of harm for that boy.
>>REGINA: Right.
Because they're pushing
their boundaries.
They have to.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes.
And once that was done, and the
boy went through that ordeal,
and faced their fear,
and came out of it,
the boy dies, basically,
and becomes a man.
Then he gets reintroduced
into society.
So the ordeal happens here, not
within the social structure.
>>REGINA: But right
now, it's happening
within the social
structure and people
are trying to mediate
it all the time
or they're trying
to self-medicate.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah, they're
trying to deal with it rather
than encouraging it--
>>REGINA: Exactly.
It's very sad.
>>CHOKOISKY: --in a healthy way.
And women have-- now, for boys
it's harder, I should say,
because for women,
once menstruation,
with the first
menstruation, this
is a sign that the girl is now
becoming a woman or on her way.
Boys don't have that.
So it's a little bit harder
for them to find themselves,
which is why the
elders of the tribe
are very important
in teaching them.
And I talk about, in the
book, specific things
you can do to help
your-- to help
you become-- to embody
that Warrior ethic.
And what is a Warrior?
A Warrior protects those who
can't protect themselves.
So whatever your Dharma
type-- I, as a man,
if something happened
right now, it's
my Dharma, my duty, to turn
around and step on that roach
if it's there, or
to protect society.
And equipment, and you, and
everyone else from danger.
Nevermind that I'm an Educator.
That's a more basic
kind of primal role
that we all have to learn
to become masculine men,
and sometimes you'll see men who
are grown up, they're 30 or 40,
but they're still boys--
>>REGINA: Ooh, I--
>>CHOKOISKY: --inside.
>>REGINA: You see a lot of that.
That's more dominant,
it seems, than men
who've been able to go through
the process of really becoming
men and taking on
that responsibility.
>>CHOKOISKY: And
have compassion.
It's not easy.
>>REGINA: Oh, I do.
I do.
And society doesn't really
promote it or allow it even.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah.
Yeah.
On the other hand, the basic
biological, you can say,
role of the woman
is as a nurturer,
and remember I said earlier
that Laborers build and nurture.
Society is built around
the hearth, the-- one
of my mentors used to say,
if it weren't for women,
all men would still
live in caves.
We don't have that
organizing principle,
so the woman is the
center of value.
The word for it in
Sanskrit is Shakti.
In Hebrew, it's Shekhinah.
This sense of the
divine manifest
and it's most manifest
in women as brilliance,
as shine, which is why
commercials for hair products--
your hair will shine,
you will be brilliant--
because this is an essential
quality of femininity.
It's brilliant, bright, and it's
what brings value to anything.
If there is a
woman-- and Laborers
do that as well, by the way.
They create value.
Like Merchants, they build
the things that have value.
So the fundamental role
of the woman-- and this
may sound a little bit
misogynistic or at least
patriarchal until you
understand what I truly
mean-- is as the Laborer.
You give birth, you nurture,
and you build, nurture society,
and--
>>REGINA: Which creates
the glue for society.
>>CHOKOISKY: It is the glue.
Exactly.
And even this idea of
the hearth and cooking,
think about the cultures
that are best known
for their food
and their cuisine,
like the French cuisine--
>>REGINA: Italian.
>>CHOKOISKY: Italian food.
And then think
about the cultures
that are best known for their
lovers, and their sensuality,
and romance.
>>REGINA: Same.
>>CHOKOISKY: It's the same.
So there is some
link between working
with food and the senses--
touch, taste, smell--
and your ability to
express sensuality.
So learning how
to work with food
and learning how
to nurture society
is the role of the Laborer
and, in a biological sense,
of women.
>>REGINA: So that just
lays a general, as you say,
primal platform--
>>CHOKOISKY: Correct.
That's the primal platform.
>>REGINA: --with many variances.
I mean, and assuming we
choose our incarnation path,
we are making a commitment,
at any given time or lifetime,
to one of the other, and
to embody one or the other.
>>CHOKOISKY: The
problem is if we
don't have this handle, that
very basic primal platform,
then building on your
Dharma type-- so I'm a man.
At some level I have Warrior
qualities that are just
wired in me, but--
and if I don't
have that handled, how will I
express myself as an Educator?
How will I be able
to fully express
my personality if that base
foundation isn't there?
Which is why I
teach people-- and I
talk about it in
the book-- get this
down first if you really want to
be able to express your Dharma
type.
>>REGINA: Yes, and I
noticed more in my age group
with my peers, my
friends, I have
quite a number of girlfriends
that either never married,
or never had children, and it's
a very different expression,
on one hand, but what
happened in their lives,
in almost every case,
is they ended up
becoming very involved in, like,
the lives of their neighbor's
children and that became their
children, or their nieces
and nephews, or some
other means to utilize
that nurturing that's
innately sitting there,
even though they're
gung-ho in their career,
travel photographers,
all these things,
it still had to
show itself somehow.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes.
Beautiful.
And it will.
It will whether you
allow it or not, and--
>>REGINA: Right.
It just seemed to be natural.
I watched it evolve over
the last few decades
and it's been interesting.
They still found a way to
show the Laborer portion.
>>CHOKOISKY: The thing is, these
ideas, these names and labels,
they're not something somebody
thought of, thought up,
they're something someone
observed in human nature
and said, OK, we'll
call this a Laborer.
It's like the signs
of the zodiac.
People think, well,
where's the bull in Taurus?
I don't see a bull, there's
just a bunch of stars,
and you're right, it is
just a bunch of stars.
There is no well-outlined
shape of a bull,
let's say, in this
part of the sky.
What there is, though, is that
when the ancients saw planets
passing through that
little swath of the sky,
they noticed it had an
effect on agriculture.
So when the sun was there, when
Saturn was-- when the sun was
there, things would grow.
When Saturn's there,
things don't grow.
So OK, that part of the sky
has to do with agriculture,
so let's put a bull
there to symbolize that.
You see?
That's how astrology works.
It's not so much that we put--
>>REGINA: It's
through observation.
>>CHOKOISKY: --our ideas,
we observe what's happening
and then try to capture
that information
in an easy to access
way, which, in this case,
is the zodiac and
the Dharma types.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, so now let's go
to-- we've looked
at our base primal types.
Now, you say here that women,
it is our innate nature
to poke at, test, and look
for higher qualities in men.
And that is what we
truly should be doing
is to test them,
and poke at them,
and let them be the best they
can be, prove themselves to us.
But instead, you get
also, a lot of women
who are total enablers,
which have allowed men
to remain boys.
>>SIMON CHOKOISKY: Yeah.
And that's-- this is nothing
but evolutionary biology,
by the way, because from the
standpoint of evolutionary
biology, women face a much more
precarious situation in having
to maintain a pregnancy for nine
months and then rear and raise
a child for however many years.
They're vulnerable.
So you want to test the
man, the partner, who's
with you to see if they're going
to be capable of helping you.
If they're real men to sort
of support you and nurture,
find food for you.
This goes back to
hunter gatherer times.
So it's innate.
So a woman will test
you by-- test you
if you're a man by, there
are a number of ways,
but essentially by keeping
true to who you are.
You didn't take out the garbage?
Hey, why didn't you
take out the garbage?
Means, why are you sleeping in?
Why are you being lazy?
Why aren't you a Warrior
standing up to protect me?
That's what why didn't you
take out the garbage means.
And for a man to not
recognize that, oh, just
stop nagging, I'll do it
later, I'm watching the game.
>>REGINA: The bin's
only half-full.
>>CHOKOISKY: It's
>>REGINA: Don't worry about it.
>>CHOKOISKY: So there's
interplay, there's play there,
and the man can become
too lazy, a woman
can become too
demanding, but you have
to recognize what's happening.
It's a test.
Everything is a test.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK, now, what are men
looking for in women?
>>CHOKOISKY: Well, again,
from the standpoint
of evolutionary
biology, men are looking
for a woman who can reproduce,
and this is very basic.
But beyond that, men are looking
for the qualities of Shakti,
as I mentioned earlier, that
shine, that divinity that says,
I'm a radiant being.
And the Goddess in
traditional cultures
is the civilizing
impulse of society.
In Vedic traditions,
she's called Saraswati.
And Saraswati is the goddess
of culture, of agriculture,
of music, of art
and poetry, and men
don't come up with music, art,
and poetry for themselves.
>>REGINA: Yes, there's usually
a subject or object of it.
>>CHOKOISKY: There is an object
and it is usually Shakti,
because we see it, and
some other part of us
wakes up and connects
us to our divine,
and that brings that out.
So Shakti is-- it's the
reason we're all here, really.
We're not here just to
survive, as human beings.
In "Dead Poets Society," Robin
Williams-- the late Robin
Williams-- says, you
know, law, medicine,
these are noble professions,
but the reason we're here
is love, poetry, and art, right?
>>REGINA: Yes,
that was beautiful.
Yes.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's Shakti.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Now, we'll come back to
the kind of faked versions,
or the girl/woman,
boy/man later,
but first, let's look at how
relationship and sexuality
plays out in each of the
types that we've already
had the overlay for--
I mean, the base for.
>>CHOKOISKY: Well, if
you are a man or a woman,
and you're an
Educator, and you're
looking to attract a partner
in your life, for Educators,
we're not the party hardy kind.
We're more of the aloof knowers,
the generators of wisdom.
So it can be very painful
to go to parties and kind
of not fit in, or try to make
yourself look a certain way,
or have muscles--
>>REGINA: Yeah, go out--
>>CHOKOISKY: --or have that.
>>REGINA: --feeling
awkward and awful.
>>CHOKOISKY: And
you feel awkward.
Your strength is in your
wisdom and, let's say,
so I'm a man, from a male
perspective, if I'm on a date,
rather than going like
this, hey, how you doing?
>>REGINA: Want to arm wrestle?
>>CHOKOISKY: Hey, how you doing?
Hey.
Right?
I want to show my
strength is in my wisdom.
Oh, this wine, yes, this
is from France, 1942,
and that year was a
very interesting year,
and let me tell you about it.
>>REGINA: Now, you
guys sometimes that--
>>CHOKOISKY: Hmm.
>>REGINA: Is that also seen
as a know-it-all sometimes?
>>CHOKOISKY: Oh, yes, and
it can be painful too,
which is why certain
types go well together.
So Educators match
well with Warriors,
and we'll talk
about this, I guess,
in a second, because Warriors
go, yeah, yeah, yeah,
OK, enough of that.
Now, next.
>>REGINA: They
want to get to it.
>>CHOKOISKY: They
hold you accountable
and they'll keep
you from wandering
if you're an Educator,
whereas the Educator gives
the Warrior their highest
cause to fight for.
Honey, did you see that
there was a volcano--
an earthquake in Nepal?
There is?
Oh my god, I need to go help.
Well, let me tell you about it.
And so Educators feed
Warriors the just cause.
But back to this idea of how
to attract the mate for you.
Be yourself.
And you see this in
self-help books everywhere.
What do men want
to see in a woman
and what do women
want to see in a man?
It's confidence, a sense
of self, but where does
that come from?
It comes from knowing
your Dharma, your purpose.
And again, that's why I
sort of defer back to that.
So be yourself as an Educator,
be yourself as a Warrior.
Show your mate that you have a
cause that you're fighting for.
>>REGINA: So as Warriors,
that's how you show up if you're
on a date, for example.
You meet someone.
>>CHOKOISKY: Listen,
you might have no money,
you might have no job even,
but you take your date
and you show them that you
teach guitar to inner city kids,
and they look up to
you, and you create
that's safe space for them,
your date will admire that,
regardless of the fact that
the other stuff isn't going on.
Show your potential partner
what your true purpose
is, express it.
So if you're a Laborer, show
them how nurturing you are.
If you're a Merchant,
show them how fun you
are, and just, like, being
with you is, like, wow,
I'm always smiling
when I'm around you.
It's amazing.
That's their gift.
They might not know where-- they
might not have the other gifts,
but that's OK, you
have your gift.
That's how you attract
the right person for you.
And in the book,
I talk about which
places to hang out--
briefly talk about this.
If you're an Educator,
you might not
want to hang out
at the night clubs
all the time, because
the people who--
>>REGINA: That's
not who you are.
>>CHOKOISKY: That's
not who you are
and you won't find the
right people there.
>>REGINA: But Merchants
do well there.
>>CHOKOISKY: They do well, yes.
So that's kind of
a basic nutshell.
>>REGINA: So a Warrior has to
show they can do what they do.
A Merchant has to show that they
can really provide a good time,
essentially, create fun and--
>>CHOKOISKY: Light.
Take you away from
your troubles.
>>REGINA: Take you away
from your troubles.
>>CHOKOISKY: When I'm
around a Merchant,
I forget about my
depression, I forget
about my fears and my anxieties.
I'm just having fun.
>>REGINA: OK, now, what
about being around Laborers?
>>CHOKOISKY: Being
around Laborers--
>>REGINA: Or Laborers
projecting so that they
can find the right match.
What do they need to project?
>>CHOKOISKY: So for men
and women, it's different,
so let's start with men.
If I'm a Laborer man, I show
that I am solid, dependable--
>>REGINA: You can--
>>CHOKOISKY: --and you can't--
>>REGINA: --build
stuff, do stuff.
>>CHOKOISKY: --you
can't push me over.
You're stupid,
get away from him.
You don't use force, you're
just solid, you're there.
Harrison Ford, Laborer
type, has a certain quality.
I'm useful, number two.
Oh, flat tire.
I'll fix that for you.
Oh, house is leaking.
Let me take care
of that for you.
Laborers often show
love through acts
of caring rather
than, oh, honey, you
have the most beautiful eyes.
They tend to be less
verbal and more kinesthetic
in their display of emotion.
But they also have
a strong-- Laborers
relate to the earth element.
Earth has to do with smell
and they have a strong sensor
pheromones chemistry.
They'll know if you're the one
just the first second they meet
you just by that subtle
smell, or they'll
know if you're
not the right one.
>>REGINA: It's earthy.
>>CHOKOISKY: It's earthy
and you can't take
the square root of a pheromone.
You can't figure it
out, but you know it.
And Laborers have that
heart to heart connection,
or they'll take your hand
and just give you a massage,
and you go, oh, OK.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and so
women who are Laborers then,
they would be maybe the ones
who would make a beautiful meal
or something.
>>CHOKOISKY: A beautiful meal.
The way to a person's heart
is through their stomach,
and I say person because
it works both ways.
And again, that sensual
quality of touch,
that ability to nurture,
and the man just
feels nurtured, taken care of.
>>REGINA: Like I
can take a breath.
>>CHOKOISKY: I
>>REGINA: OK, so let's talk
about the Outsider again,
because--
>>CHOKOISKY: Outsider.
>>REGINA: --since
there are so many.
>>CHOKOISKY: Exotic.
You are exotic.
I was in a long 30-year
Outsider period,
and I would say that,
as I was dating,
the thing people found
most interesting about me
was that I was different.
I spoke different
languages, I had
traveled to different
places, and I brought
a sense of wonder, mysticism.
Whether-- again, so
let's say you're a woman,
you're an Outsider, and
you're meeting a man,
and he's a Merchant
or something else,
he's going to try
to figure you out.
What is it about you that's,
like, I can't place you.
You can't place me,
You can't own me, man.
But here's the
mystery that I bring.
You know what?
Let's get out of
this restaurant.
Let's go jump in
the fountain, right?
There's that sense
of impulsivity,
but also innovation, new,
newness that Outsiders bring.
It's exciting.
>>REGINA: It's exciting, and
perhaps also intimidating,
depending on the
type you're with,
and we're going to talk
about type, the best matches
and mismatches for each type.
>>CHOKOISKY: OK.
>>REGINA: OK?
>>CHOKOISKY: Outsiders,
because they are adaptable,
can fit when they want to
with any of the other types.
Often it's best to
have another Outsider,
though, because you really
understand each other.
You--
>>REGINA: You know things
are going to shift a lot.
>>CHOKOISKY: And even more
fundamental than that is you
understand each other's
need to be different,
and to have freedom.
Outsiders require freedom
more than anything else.
As much as they require
air, they need freedom.
>>REGINA: It's true.
I know, my friends and I
will often-- or there'll
be little games.
What's the most
important thing to you?
I always say freedom.
>>CHOKOISKY: Freedom.
And I should have started
that at the beginning,
because freedom is the
keyword for Outsiders,
wisdom for Educators.
>>REGINA: What is
it for each one?
The keyword.
>>CHOKOISKY: So
value for Merchants,
and stability or nourishment
for Laborers, and for Warriors,
it's actually purpose.
Having something to
fight for gives them
their purpose, right?
I'll take a bullet, but who
am I taking a bullet for?
Oh, it's the pope.
Yes, I'm willing to do
that, because that's
something high and worthy.
I will give my life for that.
And it makes them feel good.
On a lower level, it's,
you're Michael Jordan
you're playing for a team.
I'll sacrifice
myself for my team.
I don't care if it
sprains my ankle or not,
I'll dive for that ball, right?
Because it's my
team and teammates
that I'm fighting for.
>>REGINA: That's a
kind of good lens
to look through when you look
at athletes in different Dharma
types.
Does that usually show up
in the positions they play?
>>CHOKOISKY: With the
positions they play, how they--
>>REGINA: And the way they play.
>>CHOKOISKY: And
the way they play.
I just read an article on the
plane about Jimmy Johnson,
the coach of the
Dallas Cowboys in 1993,
and how he motivate them.
And the thrust of the
article, basically,
was that some teams are
motivated by discipline.
This is what we're
going to do, you're
going to turn in at 10:00
PM, and tomorrow we're
going to play the
game of our lives.
Other teams, by no discipline.
All right, I don't know where
you guys are going tonight,
I don't want to know,
no curfew, have fun,
get relaxed before the game, and
tomorrow just show up excited.
And those are
different strategies
from different types of
teams, and teams have
Dharma types, a collective--
>>REGINA: Just like a
marriage or any partnership.
>>CHOKOISKY: Just like a
marriage and a country.
America's a Merchant country.
Italy's a Merchant country--
Laborer, Merchant country.
So a team.
So once you know your
team's personality--
and Jimmy Johnson
was a psychologist,
he studied psychology,
he understood well--
you know how to motivate them.
>>REGINA: So let's
go back now to
within the types, who each of
the types are most suited with.
So we just said
Outsiders can kind of
go anywhere they want as
long as they choose to.
>>CHOKOISKY: They
can go anywhere,
but they feel at most at
home with other Outsiders.
>>REGINA: Other Outsiders.
OK, how about the Merchant?
>>CHOKOISKY: The
Merchant feels most
at ease-- or their most
evolutionary partner
is a Laborer.
Because Merchants
have the excitement,
but Merchants have a dilemma.
They have a hole in their
heart that often there's
a sense of emptiness,
which they try
to fill with experiences, with
the newest radio, the newest
stereo, the newest
partner, the newest car,
but these things are temporary.
What fills them is charity.
So the Merchant's gift
is the gift of giving.
Laborers teach them that
better than any other type.
Laborers are stable.
>>REGINA: Because
they're nourishing.
>>CHOKOISKY: There's
a nourishing quality,
and they evolve together.
For the Laborer who can become
a little bit too complacent,
too stuck in a rut.
I only listen to that
classic rock station
and that's all I listen to.
It's Credence Clearwater
Revival every day
for the rest of my life.
OK, CCR is great, but if
that's all you do every day,
you're stuck in a rut.
Merchants are exciting.
They get them out of their rut.
Hey, honey, I'm going
to take you by the hand.
Let's go take a staycation.
Let's go see the fountain.
Let's go see the sunrise
above, I don't know,
above the mountains.
It takes them out
of their routine.
So they work together.
>>REGINA: So they
complement each other.
>>CHOKOISKY: It's not
always comfortable.
It's a sense of opposites
attract and work together.
The sense of opposites detract,
or don't work together,
is a Merchant--
since we're talking
about Merchants-- and Warriors.
Merchants and Warriors
don't work well together.
>>REGINA: Purpose driven
and more sensually
pleasure driven in a sense.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes.
Correct.
And they each give
up their principles--
>>REGINA: To
accommodate the other.
>>CHOKOISKY: --when
they're around each other.
Doesn't mean that that
relationship can't work.
It means it needs
work, and it needs work
means communication,
communication, communication.
When I said, I don't know,
take out the garbage,
I didn't mean to
scold you, what I
meant was that, because
there's something fermenting
and growing in there, it's
going to affect your allergies
and you won't feel
good tomorrow, right?
But this person heard,
take out the garbage.
Why is she always yelling at me?
And the Warrior, right?
>>REGINA: So it takes
more communication--
>>CHOKOISKY: Communication.
>>REGINA: --than is
necessarily between types
that are compatible.
>>CHOKOISKY: Communicate,
communicate as much as possible
so that that
Warrior, who's maybe
trying to protect
the Merchant, doesn't
sound like they're trying
to punish the Merchant,
and vice versa.
So in relationships where the
types are less compatible,
communication's very important.
So that's the Merchant.
Opposites attract with Laborers.
Opposites detract with Warriors.
The Outsider, we talked about.
Then the Laborer,
again, same thing.
They work well with Merchants.
They disintegrate and they
detract around Educators.
Laborers like Oprah Winfrey
often say-- like Pavarotti--
that when they're around quote,
unquote, "smart or worldly"
people, they feel diminished.
Even Oprah used to
say, I read somewhere,
that when she's
around these doctors,
PhDs-- this is Oprah, the most
powerful woman in the world,
she could eat people
for breakfast,
but she feels-- because
being a Laborer type,
there is a sense of, well,
I don't know these things,
therefore, I'm not enough,
and that's total bull.
Pavarotti couldn't read
music, but could he sing?
Right?
What's important is the outcome.
So Laborers around Educators
may feel a little small,
and Educators
around Laborers may
feel that they are
not appreciated
for their subtle
gifts of wisdom,
that their wisdom
isn't understood.
It may be understood, but the
Laborer doesn't express it,
so again--
>>REGINA: Or the
Educator may want
to share all this
enlightened wisdom and all
of their interests,
and the Laborer's
wanting to build
them a rock garden.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yes.
>>REGINA: It's like--
>>CHOKOISKY: Beautiful.
>>REGINA: --not happening.
>>CHOKOISKY: And Educator
is the air element.
Laborers are the earth element.
When there's too much
wind, it erodes the other.
>>REGINA: Yes.
The Warrior.
>>CHOKOISKY: Warrior.
So the Warrior disintegrates
with the Merchant,
as we talked about, and they
integrate into the Educator.
So there's the
opposites attract.
Warriors and Educators
need each other
to become the best they can be.
It's not always easy.
It can be tumultuous,
but if you're
focused on growing and
evolving, the Warrior
will keep you true
as an Educator,
and the Educator will
give you the purpose
to live for that you
seek as a Warrior.
>>REGINA: Do some
people, sometimes,
do they feel-- say, a Merchant
with a Merchant, like, woo,
let's party.
Let's have a wonderful time.
>>CHOKOISKY: You get each other.
>>REGINA: You get each other.
>>CHOKOISKY: But it can become
boring, in that, OK, fine,
I know how to party.
>>REGINA: Now what do we do?
>>CHOKOISKY: Now what?
>>REGINA: Who has the wisdom?
Who has the Laborer?
>>CHOKOISKY: It's still good.
It's still good, mind you.
It's a-- I call it
good compatibility,
not excellent compatibility.
>>REGINA: Because there
needs to be something--
>>CHOKOISKY: Some dynamic.
>>REGINA: --in which you can,
yeah, grow from the union,
right?
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah.
Exactly.
The good news is that we all, at
times, enter Merchant, Laborer
different periods in our lives.
I just had a consultation
with an Educator,
and he's in a Merchant
period, and I said,
you're focused on marketing,
networking your ideas,
your knowledge and wisdom.
>>REGINA: And you could see
this in his chart again.
>>CHOKOISKY: Oh, easy.
And he said, that's exactly
what I'm doing, and I said,
even though you're
an Educator, this
is your time to market yourself
now, so go for it, do it.
And this is-- and I'll
be honest-- this is the,
maybe, the difficult
part of the Dharma types
is that number one, it takes
a little time to know yours,
and number two, it may take
a personal consultation
to really understand
where you're
at with your Dharma type.
>>REGINA: Because you're having
to grow other parts, right?
>>CHOKOISKY: Right.
Right.
And your--
>>REGINA: If you're a Warrior
having to now play Merchant--
>>CHOKOISKY: You need guidance.
>>REGINA: --that's
antithetical to who you are.
>>CHOKOISKY: Yeah.
So here I am working
for a big corporation,
making money, doing
something I don't believe in,
but I have to do it.
What to do?
>>REGINA: Right.
Those are very difficult choice
points in people's lives.
>>CHOKOISKY: But you see,
we've established a language
to describe the situation,
because this person,
often when they
come to a reading,
they don't know
what's happening.
They just know I'm stuck.
>>REGINA: Right.
It doesn't feel good.
>>CHOKOISKY: There's
resistance in my life.
I don't feel good.
I don't know why though.
Yeah, I know I don't like my
job, but why don't I like it?
I should like it.
And when we have a
language, well, you're
a Warrior, so continue
doing this job,
take 10% of your income and
donate it to this cause,
and take 10% of
your time and start
doing something
that protects those
who can't protect themselves.
>>REGINA: There you go.
>>CHOKOISKY: Young mothers--
>>REGINA: So there is a way to--
>>CHOKOISKY: --young children.
>>REGINA: --apply it
in a larger sense.
>>CHOKOISKY: Now you feel
good walking into the office.
I was just at the farm
helping give birth
to baby animals that otherwise
would have been slaughtered.
You feel good.
Nothing you say is
going to get me down.
OK?
So there is a way to
deal with that situation.
>>REGINA: OK now
let's talk about one,
you read "Cosmopolitan"
magazine.
How to be a better lover, how
many times you should have
sex a week, all these kind of--
>>CHOKOISKY: Oh yeah.
>>REGINA: --you know,
paint by number things.
OK, let's take each
type and talk about,
essentially, intimately,
how involved or uninvolved,
so to speak, each type is by
nature, in terms of, like, sex.
The Laborer in
your book, they're
the most earthy, the
most sexually active.
It's more common to have
sex regularly as a Laborer.
Let's go through each.
>>CHOKOISKY: This
is a deep topic.
>>REGINA: I know and
we have five minutes.
We have five minutes left.
But just to kind of
hit it, because people
can pick up your book, which
I highly recommend they do,
and read the rest, but give
us a thumbnail sketch of each.
>>CHOKOISKY: I'm
going to give you
a thumbnail sketch of just a
general sexual dynamic as seen
in nature.
So there's a menstrual period,
typically, every 28 days, give
or take a week or so, in women.
In men, it takes 30 to 35
days, according to Ayurveda,
to completely--
>>REGINA: Replenish.
>>CHOKOISKY: Replenish.
So there's a
principle in my book--
this is applicable
for everyone--
that I call sex for
procreation, which is simply
a look at this old
adage that says,
you should only have
sex for procreation.
Looking at it in the real sort
of constructive way, which
is having sex once
a month, which
is what sex for procreation
is, during the time that that
fertile window, maybe those
two or three days in a month
that are most fertile, is
what sex for procreation is.
OK, once a month?
Really?
Are you kidding me?
>>REGINA: But again, we're
each different types,
so we have different
requirements.
>>CHOKOISKY: And each type
can have more or less sex
during that three, sometimes
three or five day window,
depending on whether they're
an Educator, Merchant, Laborer,
and I know that's
what you're asking.
OK, and I could speak to
that, but what I really
want to speak to, at
the fundamental core,
is that you can still
have relationship--
sexual relations, outside of
that time, but for the man,
it's not when you
want to ejaculate.
You want to hold it, and what
that creates is a dynamic,
because haven't you noticed that
lovers who spend too much time
in the bedroom feel depleted,
the man gets irritable,
the man-- you become--
>>REGINA: Can reduce
yourself to sloth.
>>CHOKOISKY: Reduce
yourself to inability
to be the Warrior that you are.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah, exactly.
>>CHOKOISKY: Whereas
when you hold it--
>>REGINA: It's a lot of energy.
>>CHOKOISKY: --there becomes
a-- the polarity remains.
If you lose the polarity,
it's like having
two minuses together.
The man is the plus,
woman is the minus,
and that creates attraction,
and it creates a dynamic
where the woman now tries
to seduce you, and get that
from you, and you're, like, no,
no, no, I won't give, and yes,
and it becomes playful again.
Polarity is very
playful and it's
what deep passionate
relationships are built on.
Lose that polarity at your
peril and your relationship
may suffer.
OK, so quickly.
Educators, well, Laborers
can have the most.
Outsiders can experiment
the most in different ways.
The people who should
have-- Warriors
tend to be less, because they
need to preserve their energy.
And Merchant's kind
of in the middle.
>>REGINA: And educators?
>>CHOKOISKY: Educators
are very interesting type,
because Educators,
their secret challenge
is they have strong,
powerful passions,
and they tend to repress
them, so educators
should have sex more often.
I would say, up
there with Laborers.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
But their tendency is
not to necessarily to--
>>CHOKOISKY: Their
tendency is to repress
that, so they can seem prim and
proper, but they have passion,
and they're very
passionate people,
and if you know Educators,
and if you really kind of dig,
you will find that.
I don't want to name any names.
>>REGINA: Yes, yes, OK.
Final thoughts, because we
literally just have a minute
or so.
We didn't get to a lot
of different things,
but that's OK.
>>CHOKOISKY: We just started.
>>REGINA: We just started.
We can always do this again,
but any final thoughts before we
sign off this time?
>>CHOKOISKY: Know your
Dharma, know your purpose
on this planet, and
your life will unfold.
Dharma erases karma.
>>REGINA: On that,
thank you so much.
The time has flown.
>>CHOKOISKY: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Wish we
had a little more.
Thank you, Simon.
We only touched the surface
of the content of the book,
as Simon goes into
great detail on how
to enliven our physical
vitality, sexual vitality,
and make more
enduring partnerships,
also to attract the
right person for us.
Again, the title of the book
is "Sex, Love, and Dharma,"
which can be found
at major booksellers.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]